NLB-2234: update vmss backend documentation (#1642)
nginx/documentation: content/nginxaas-azure/vmss-backend.md

With VMSS backend integration, you can:

- Automatically sync VMSS instance IP addresses to NGINX upstreams
- Scale VMSS instances out and in without NGINX configuration changes

## Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    Agent[nginx-asg-sync Agent] --> |Update upstreams via API| NGINXaaS
    
    MI[Managed Identity] --> |Read permissions| VMSS
    Agent --> |Uses| MI
    
    style NGINXaaS fill:#e1f5fe
    style Agent fill:#f3e5f5
    style VMSS fill:#fff3e0
```

The nginx-asg-sync agent monitors your VMSS for scaling changes and automatically updates the NGINXaaS upstream configuration via the dataplane API. This ensures that traffic is distributed to all instances without manual intervention.

## Prerequisites

Before setting up VMSS backend integration, ensure you have:

- An active NGINXaaS for Azure deployment
- Azure Virtual Machine Scale Sets (VMSS)
- Network connectivity between NGINXaaS and VMSS instances
- An Azure VM or container to run the nginx-asg-sync agent
- Appropriate Azure permissions to assign managed identities

## Getting Started

> ### Step 1: Create NGINXaaS deployment with dynamic upstreams

Reviewer: Make this at other places as well. 
Refer: https://github.com/nginx/documentation/pull/1384

- The upstream cannot have any static servers defined via the `server` directive
- The upstream must have a shared memory [zone](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_upstream_module.html#zone) defined
- The upstream must have a [state](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_upstream_module.html#state) file declared

Example NGINX configuration:

```nginx
http{
    upstream backend-one {
        zone backend-one 64k;
        state /opt/nginx/state/backend-one.conf;
    }

    upstream backend-two {
        zone backend-two 64k;
        state /opt/nginx/state/backend-two.conf;
    }

    server {
        listen 80;

        status_zone backend;

        location /backend-one {
            proxy_set_header Host $host;
            proxy_pass http://backend-one;
        }

        location @hc-backend-one {
            internal;
            proxy_connect_timeout 1s;
            proxy_read_timeout 1s;
            proxy_send_timeout 1s;

            proxy_pass http://backend-one;
            health_check interval=1s mandatory;
        }

        location /backend-two {
            proxy_set_header Host $host;
            proxy_pass http://backend-two;
        }

>         location @hc-backend-two {

Reviewer 2: Do we need to have two backend upstream groups.  Seems for simplicity we'd just keep this simple and create one upstream group.

```bash
# Set variables
vmName="sync-agent-vm"
vmResourceGroup="myResourceGroup"
vmssResourceGroup="myVmssResourceGroup"
vmssName="backend-one-vmss"
subscriptionId=$(az account show --query id --output tsv)

# Enable system-assigned managed identity on VM
az vm identity assign \
  --resource-group $vmResourceGroup \
  --name $vmName
```

#### Get the VM's Managed Identity Principal ID

Retrieve the principal ID of the VM's system-assigned managed identity:

```bash
# Get the identity's principal ID
principalId=$(az vm show \
  --resource-group $vmResourceGroup \
  --name $vmName \
  --query identity.principalId \
  --output tsv)
```

#### Create the Custom Role

Create a custom role with only the necessary permissions for nginx-asg-sync:

Create a file called `vmss-network-read-role.json`:

```json
{
  "Name": "VMSS-Network-Read-Role",
  "Description": "Read VMSS and VMSS network interface information",
  "Actions": [
    "Microsoft.Compute/virtualMachineScaleSets/read",
    "Microsoft.Compute/virtualMachineScaleSets/networkInterfaces/read"
  ],
  "NotActions": [],
  "AssignableScopes": [
    "/subscriptions/<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>"
  ]
}
```

```bash
# Set role name

> roleName="VMSS-Network-Read-Role"

Reviewer 2: Why set this here? It's not used until later (the Assign the Custom Role script).

Author: Nice catch, shifted it to Assign the Custom Role section

---
title: Virtual Machine Scale Sets (VMSS) Backend Integration
weight: 280
toc: true
url: /nginxaas/azure/vmss-backend/
nd-content-type: how-to
nd-product: NAZURE
---

## Overview

F5 NGINXaaS for Azure provides seamless integration with Azure Virtual Machine Scale Sets (VMSS) through dynamic upstream management. This feature enables automatic scaling of your application backend without requiring manual NGINX configuration updates when VMSS instances are added or removed.

With VMSS backend integration, you can:

- Automatically sync VMSS instance IP addresses to NGINX upstreams
- Scale VMSS instances out and in without NGINX configuration changes

## Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB

>     Users[Users] --> NGINXaaS[NGINXaaS for Azure] 

Reviewer 3: I would get rid of the Users line. I think it's unnecessary and adds clutter to the diagram.

>     Agent[nginx-asg-sync Agent] --> |Watch VMSS changes| VMSS[Azure VMSS]

Author: removed the above line and included just the agent connecting to vmss

    Agent --> |Update upstreams via API| NGINXaaS
    
    MI[Managed Identity] --> |Read permissions| VMSS
    Agent --> |Uses| MI
    
    style NGINXaaS fill:#e1f5fe
    style Agent fill:#f3e5f5
    style VMSS fill:#fff3e0
```

> The nginx-asg-sync agent monitors your VMSS for scaling events and automatically updates the NGINXaaS upstream configuration via the dataplane API. This ensures that traffic is distributed to all healthy instances without manual intervention.

Author: updated above suggested change

        }
    }
}
```

{{< call-out "important" >}}
**Health Checks Recommendation**: It is strongly recommended to add active health checks for your upstreams using VMSS backend. This will prevent traffic from being routed to an unready VMSS instance and ensure better reliability during scaling operations.
{{< /call-out >}}

[Apply this NGINX configuration]({{< ref "/nginxaas-azure/getting-started/nginx-configuration/overview/" >}}) to your NGINXaaS deployment.

### Step 2: Create Virtual Machine Scale Sets and ensure network connectivity

Create your Azure Virtual Machine Scale Sets that will serve as backend servers for your applications.

#### Create VMSS

Create Virtual Machine Scale Sets for your application backends. You can create VMSS using:

- **Azure Portal**: Navigate to **Virtual machine scale sets** in the Azure portal and follow the creation wizard
- **Azure CLI**: Use the `az vmss create` command with appropriate parameters for your requirements

For detailed instructions on creating VMSS, see the [Azure documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machine-scale-sets/flexible-virtual-machine-scale-sets-portal).

> - Ensure network connectivity between the subnet delegated to the NGINXaaS deployment and vmss. For example, the vmss and NGINXaaS deployment can run on the same Azure VNET or on peered VNETs.

Author: updated and maintained consistent in capitalization of vmss

> - Install and run your applications on the vmss.

Author: removed the above suggested instructions

case "$ARCH" in
  x86_64) ARCH="amd64" ;;
  aarch64) ARCH="arm64" ;;
  *) echo "Unsupported architecture" && exit 1 ;;
esac

# Download and install nginx-asg-sync
curl -LO "${BASE_URL}/nginx-asg-sync_${VERSION}_linux_${ARCH}.tar.gz"
tar -xzf "nginx-asg-sync_${VERSION}_linux_${ARCH}.tar.gz"
chmod +x nginx-asg-sync
sudo mv nginx-asg-sync /usr/local/bin/

# Verify installation
ls -la /usr/local/bin/nginx-asg-sync

# Create configuration directory
sudo mkdir -p /etc/nginx/
```

#### Option B: Run as Container

Deploy nginx-asg-sync as a container using Docker:

```bash
# Pull the Docker image
docker pull docker.io/nginx/nginx-asg-sync:v1.0.1-79-g950b8bc-dirty

# Create the configuration file (config.yaml) in your current directory
# (See Step 6 for the complete configuration file content)

# Run nginx-asg-sync container
docker run --rm -it \
  -v $(pwd)/config.yaml:/etc/nginx/config.yaml \
  -e CONFIG_PATH=/etc/nginx/config.yaml \
  docker.io/nginx/nginx-asg-sync:v1.0.1-79-g950b8bc-dirty
```

Example output when the container starts successfully:

```
2025/12/31 10:25:30 nginx-asg-sync version v1.0.1-79-g950b8bc-dirty
```

### Step 5: Assign managed identity permissions

> nginx-asg-sync uses the Azure API to get the list of IP addresses of the instances of a Virtual Machine Scale Set. To access the Azure API, nginx-asg-sync must have credentials. This section configures a system-assigned managed identity with the minimum required permissions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
nginx-asg-sync uses the Azure API to read the IP addresses of the Virtual Machine Scale Set. To access the Azure API, nginx-asg-sync must run in an environment with appropriate permissions over the VMSS backend. This section configures a system-assigned managed identity with the minimum required permissions.
```
